Numerical Methods- Introduction

In the main text of the chapter, we introduced a framework for implementing ecotoxicological models which stressed building models rather than directly copying models from a reference source. This type of model building approach was stressed for a variety of reasons.

First, this chapter was written by and primarily for engineers who want to explore the space of ecotoxicological modeling. In their curriculum, engineers are taught how to build mathematical models of physical systems. While these tools are usually applied to fields like fluid mechanics, thermodynamics, etc, these same tools are useful in a large variety of disciplines. One of these fields (in the veiw of the authors) is ecotoxicological modeling. Given engineers usually learn how to approach a subject through equations and building models, we wanted to recreate that pedagogy in our approach to ecotoxicological modelling.

Second, it is quite common for "off-the-shelf" ecotoxicological models to be applied (in the veiw of the authors) innappropriately when modeling a system of interest. This issue is, to be clear, not a problem with the commonly available ecotoxicological models found in primary or secondary literature on the subject. These models are the basis of the relations found in the texbook chapter after all. The issue is when they are innappropriately applied. This misapplication could of course be blamed on those who misapply the model. However, one could also blame the paradigm of how ecotoxciological models are incorporated into experimental ecotoxicology. Very often, the basic relations put forward in ecotoxicological models are taken "off-the-shelf" and applied directly to an experimental system of interest, with little modification. At a deeper level, an ecotoxicologist might think of applying . This chapter attempts to address this, not by proposing a new and better model, but proposing an approach to ecotoxicological moodeling that emphasizes building models, not applying commonly used models. By emphasizing an approach and the concept of "building" ecotoxicological mdoels for a mirco/mesocosm, we hope to increase the quality of models used in experimental studies. By making researcher's think of building a unique model for THEIR experimental system (or THEIR model), we hope the models used are more fit-for-purpose, and subsequently better acpture the behavior of a given system. 

Third, stressing building models rather than using reference source models greatly expands the universe of ecosystems which can be modelled. No single reference source can be written which accounts for the practically infinite different models which could be required in experimental ecotoxicology. A well-developed modelling approach however is infitely replicable, and this is what we tried to build in this chapter. This should encourage more scientists to tackle ecotoxicological modelling in their works. 

While there are benefits to this approach to ecotoxicological modelling, there are also several drawbacks. One major drawback to this approach to modeling the effects of an ecotoxicant on an ecosystem of interest (ecotoxicological modelling) via building boutique models for each situation is that general solutions methods for the developed models will be impossible. As with the case-study example from the chapter (for those who went and looked at the appendices of the actual study referenced), ecotoxicological models can get complicated very fast. In the case study, there were 13 coupled ordinary differential equations (ODEs) which emerged in the bioaccumulation model. While in this specific case analytical solutions could be used to solve the system (given it a first-order linear set of ODEs), the general set of ODEs which can emerge from the general FTE modeling framework put forward in the book chapter do not have a unifying set of analytical solutions. The primary culprits of this are the

1) predation/consumption terms in the biomass balances, which couple predator and prey,
2) dietary transfer terms in ecotoxicant balances, which are coupled to food biomass, and
3) poisoning terms in biomass balances, which are couple dot internal ecotoxicant concentration.

This has important implications for ecotoxicological modelling. In ecotoxicological models where the final set of differential equations which emerge are linear (no coupling), then the set of ODEs can be solved analytically. Many resources are available for understanding how to solve large sets of first-order linear ODEs analytically.[1] While it is not a trivial exercise (requires knowledge of matrix algebra), it possible. This is distinct from large 


[1] Rice and Do. "Applied Mathematics and Modeling for Chemical Engineers". Wiley. 2nd Ed. 2012. Hoboken, NJ. 


